.TH sbotest 1 "Boomtime, Bureaucracy 43, 3191 YOLD" "sbotest 1.1.2" sbotest
.SH NAME
.P
.B
sbotest
- build test SlackBuilds and their reverse dependencies
.SH SYNOPSIS
.P
sbotest [-h|-v]
.P
sbotest pull [-B BRANCH|FALSE] [-r URL|FALSE]
.P
sbotest [config|find|hints] ...
.P
sbotest [-f|-s] [-Akl /path|FALSE] [-j #|FALSE] \\
        [-X TRUE|FALSE] [-D] [--no-archive|--archive-force] \\
        sbo_name (sbo_name)
.P
sbotest [-Al /path|FALSE] [-SX TRUE|FALSE] [-j #|FALSE] \\
        [-D] --archive-rebuild
.P
sbotest [-Al /path|FALSE] [-SX TRUE|FALSE] [-j #|FALSE] \\
        [-D] --archive-reverse
.P
sbotest [-Al /path|FALSE] [-SX TRUE|FALSE] [-j #|FALSE] \\
        [--no-archive|--archive-force] --test-everything
.SH DISCLAIMER
.P
.B
sbotest
is designed and intended to run in a clean build-testing environment,
such as a virtual machine or a
.B
Docker
image. Missing users and groups are added automatically when running
.B
sbotest\fR\
\&, and any packages installed as a result of testing are removed
afterwards unless they had been previously installed.
.P
Using
.B
sbotest
on a general-purpose Slackware installation is
.B
unsupported
and
.B
unadvisable\fR\
\&.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B
sbotest
is a reverse dependency build tester based on the
.B
sbotools
library. To fetch or update the repository before testing, call
.B
sbotest pull\fR\
\&. Select a git branch and repository URL by editing
.I
/etc/sbotest/sbotest.conf
or, temporarily, by passing
.B
--git-branch
and
.B
--repo\fR\
\&.
.B
sbotest
is also configurable at the command line with
.B
config\fR\
\&, and per-script hints can be applied with
.B
hints\fR\
\&. See
.B
sboconfig(1)
and
.B
sbohints(1)
for more details.
.P
Called without options,
.B
sbotest
builds any requested
SlackBuilds with their first level of reverse dependencies.
Use
.B
sbotest find --first-reverse
or pass
.B
--dry-run
for a list of scripts that would be tested. To test all reverse
dependencies of the requested scripts, use the
.B
--full-reverse
option;
.B
--single
tests no reverse dependencies. Please note that already-installed
scripts can be tested only with
.B
--single\fR\
\&; the existing package on the system is not replaced.
.P
Each test target has a separate testing workflow.
.B
sbotest
attempts to minimize package installations and removals during the
test run when ordering the testing queue. First, dependencies saved
to the
.B
SBO_ARCHIVE
directory (default
.I
/usr/sbotest/archive\fR\
\&) are installed to save time; see
.B
CONFIGURATION
below for details. Any missing users and groups are added, and
.B
sboinstall(1)
is called.
.P
Newly-built packages are saved to a timestamp-appended
.B
PKG_DIR\fR\
\&. By default, any dependencies (not test targets) built are saved to
.B
SBO_ARCHIVE
for future use; to change this, see
.B
--no-archive
and
.B
--archive-force
below. Any packages that are not required for the following build
are removed afterwards. Packages without the
.I
_SBo
tag are unaffected, and no package that is already installed when
.B
sbotest
starts can be removed or reinstalled.
.P
For a full-repository test, run
.B
sbotest
with the
.B
--test-everything
option. This will build and test all packages that are
available, supported, and not on the blacklist or up-to-date
in the archive. Reverse rebuilds are performed when rebuilding
archived packages.
.P
Packages in the archive with missed rebuilds may lack required shared
object dependencies, which can in turn cause builds to fail. To check
all installed
.I
_SBo
packages for missing dependencies and incompatibility with system
.B
perl\fR\
\&,
.B
python
and
.B
ruby
upon build test failure, set
.B
SO_CHECK
to
.B
TRUE
or pass
.B
--so-check TRUE
to
.B
sbotest\fR\
\&.
.P
.B
sbopkglint(1)
is run on all test targets once
.B
sboinstall(1)
has been called for the last time. A summary of results is
displayed and saved to
.I
SBO_HOME/results/(timestamp).log\fR\
\&. Scripts that fail
.B
sbolint(1)
or
.B
sbopkglint(1)\fR\
\&, or fail to build altogether, are reported so that any
issues can be taken care of before submitting scripts to
.B
SlackBuilds.org\fR\
\&.
.P
To generate a report of potential operations,
use
.B
--dry-run
with any combination of other options.
.P
Non-root users can run sbotest with
.B
--help\fR\
\&,
.B
--version
and
.B
--dry-run.
.B
hints\fR\
\&,
.B
config
and
.B
find
can be run by anyone with listing-related options.
.SH OPTIONS
.P
.B
config
.RS
Interface with
.B
sboconfig(1)
to modify settings. All
.B
sboconfig
options can be used, with the addition of
.B
--sbo-archive\fR\
\&. See
.B
CONFIGURATION
below.
.RE
.P
.B
find
.RS
Interface with
.B
sbofind(1)
to search the local copy of the repository for SlackBuilds.
Scripts with up-to-date packages in the archive are indicated.
All
.B
sbofind
options can be used.
.RE
.P
.B
hints
.RS
Interface with
.B
sbohints(1)
to modify per-script hints. All
.B
sbohints
options can be used.
.RE
.P
.B
pull
.RS
Fetch the upstream repository to
.I
SBO_HOME/repo\fR\
\&. Flags other than
.B
--git-branch
and
.B
--repo
have no effect.
.RE
.P
.B
--archive-rebuild
.RS
Replace build- and version-mismatched packages in the archive,
.I
/usr/sbotest/archive
by default. Please note that installed and blacklisted packages are ignored.
If
.B
STRICT_UPGRADES
is
.B
TRUE\fR\
\&, only mismatched packages with lower version or build numbers are
removed from the archive.
.P
If a script to be rebuilt has an automatic reverse dependency rebuild
request in
.I
/etc/sbotest/sbotest.hints\fR\
\&, its reverse dependencies are rebuilt and replaced as well. See
.B
sbotools.hints(5)
for details about setting hints.
.P
Incompatible with
.B
--no-archive
and
.B
--archive-force\fR\
\&.
.RE
.P
.B
--archive-reverse
.RS
Perform an archive rebuild as with
.B
--archive-rebuild\fR\
\&, but rebuild all reverse dependencies as well.
.P
Incompatible with
.B
--no-archive
and
.B
--archive-force\fR\
\&.
.RE
.P
.B
-A|--sbo-archive
.RS
If
.B
FALSE\fR\
\&, use the default archive directory at
.I
SBO_HOME/archive\fR\
\&. If an
.B
absolute path\fR\
\&, use that as the archive directory.
.RE
.P
.B
--archive-force
.RS
When testing the requested scripts, copy all built packages into
.B
SBO_ARCHIVE\fR\
\&,
.I
/usr/sbotest/archive
by default. This includes even requested scripts and their reverse
dependencies.
.P
Incompatible with
.B
--archive-rebuild\fR\
\&,
.B
--archive-reverse
and
.B
---no-archive\fR\
\&.
.RE
.P
.B
-B|--git-branch
.RS
If
.B
FALSE\fR\
\&, use the default git branch for the running version of Slackware. If
a
.B
branch name\fR\
\&, use it in case of a git repository. Must be used with
.B
pull\fR\
\&.
.RE
.P
.B
-D|--dry-run
.RS
Generate a report on scripts to be tested, queued packages in the local
overrides directory and the number of archived packages to be reused. In
case of
.B
--archive-rebuild
or
.B
--archive-reverse\fR\
\&, additionally report archived packages to be removed.
.RE
.P
.B
-f|--full-reverse
.RS
Test all reverse dependencies for the requested scripts rather than
the first level only. Use
.B
sbotest find --all-reverse
or pass
.B
--dry-run
to see which scripts would be tested, if compatible.
.RE
.P
.B
-s|--single
.RS
Do not test reverse dependencies for any requested script. Enables testing
for scripts that have already been installed.
.RE
.P
.B
-j|--jobs
.RS
If
.B
numeric\fR\
\&, pass to
.B
make
with the
.B
-j
flag.
.RE
.P
.B
-k|--pkg-dir
.RS
If
.B
FALSE\fR\
\&, use the default package directory of
.I
SBO_HOME/tests/(timestamp)-tests\fR\
\&, e.g.
.I
/usr/sbotest/tests/2025-08-28-20:59-tests\fR\
\&. If an
.B
absolute path\fR\
\&, save packages built during the test run a timestamp-designated
directory under that path.
.RE
.P
.B
-l|--log-dir
.RS
If
.B
FALSE\fR\
\&, use the default log directory of
.I
SBO_HOME/logs/(timestamp)-logs\fR\
\&. If an
.B
absolute path\fR\
\&, save build and
.B
sbopkglint(1)
logs to that directory with a timestamp appended.
.RE
.P
.B
--no-archive
.RS
Do not reuse any archived packages during the test run, and do
not archive built packages.
.P
Incompatible with
.B
--archive-rebuild\fR\
\&,
.B
--archive-reverse
and
.B
--archive-force\fR\
\&.
.RE
.P
.B
-r|--repo
.RS
If
.B
FALSE\fR\
\&, use the default repository URL for the running Slackware version.
If a
.B
URL\fR\
\&, pull from that URL. Must be used with
.B
pull\fR\
\&.
.RE
.P
.B
-S|--strict-upgrades
.RS
If
.B
TRUE\fR\
\&, delete only mismatched packages with lower version
or build numbers when running
.B
--archive-rebuild
or
.B
--archive-reverse\fR\
\&. If
.B
FALSE\fR\
\&, delete all mismatched packages from the archive. Overrides
the setting in
.I
/etc/sbotest/sbotest.conf\fR\
\&.
.RE
.P
.B
--test-everything
.RS
Perform a full-repository test, respecting the blacklist. All packages
are rebuilt, except for those that are unsupported or archived and
up-to-date. Unless running with
.B
--no-archive\fR\
\&, ensure that the package archive directory exists before running.
.P
Please note that archived reverse dependencies of outdated packages are
rebuilt regardless of whether they are up-to-date.
.P
Incompatible with
.B
--single
and
.B
--archive-force\fR\
\&.
.RE
.P
.B
-X|--so-check
.RS
If
.B
TRUE\fR\
\&, perform tests for missing shared object dependencies and
.B
perl\fR\
\&,
.B
python
and
.B
ruby
incompatibility on all installed
.I
_SBo
packages upon build test failure. Overrides the setting in
.I
/etc/sbotest/sbotest.conf\fR\
\&.
.RE
.P
.B
-h|--help
.RS
Show help information.
.RE
.P
.B
-v|--version
.RS
Show version information.
.RE
.SH TESTING STRATEGIES
There are three basic ways to test scripts with
.B
sbotest\fR\
\&. After using
.B
sbotest pull
to retrieve a new branch or the latest updates:
.RS
.IP \[bu] 3n
Test against the upstream repository without changes.
.IP \[bu] 3n
Test against a git
branch with changes to be merged.
.IP \[bu] 3n
Test against the upstream repository with changes in a
local overrides directory.
.RE
.P
The first case is the simplest, and requires no configuration
beyond setting
.B
RSYNC_DEFAULT
or
.B
REPO
in
.I
/etc/sbotest/sbotest.conf
as appropriate.
.P
To test upcoming changes in a git branch, set
.B
GIT_BRANCH
to the name of the branch and ensure that
.B
REPO
is set if non-default. Alternatively, specify with the
.B
--repo
and
.B
--git-branch
options when running
.B
sbotest pull\fR\
\&. From here, run
.B
sbotest\fR\
\&. If multiple scripts are to be tested for submission,
using a single merged branch for testing may be convenient:
.RS

 git branch testbranch
 git checkout testbranch
 git merge rust-opt dos2unix fvwm3
 git push --set-upstream origin testbranch


.RE
.P
To use a local overrides directory, set
.B
LOCAL_OVERRIDES
to an absolute path. Place directories for any script to be
tested in the top level and run
.B
sbotest\fR\
\&. Removing these directories when testing is complete is advisable.
.P
Reusing built packages in future test runs saves time and resources.
The default archive directory is
.I
/usr/sbotest/archive\fR\
\&; packages stored here are reinstalled in lieu of building
when needed, provided they are up-to-date. During an
.B
sbotest
run, all built dependencies are archived by default. To archive
all built packages (including testing targets), use
.B
--archive-force\fR\
\&. Ignore the archive altogether with
.B
--no-archive\fR\
\&.
.P
The archive can be kept current with
.B
--archive-rebuild\fR\
\&. This rebuilds all version- and build-mismatched packages in the
archive, provided that they are not installed or on the blacklist.
.B
--archive-reverse
rebuilds all reverse dependencies as well. If
.B
STRICT_UPGRADES
is
.B
TRUE\fR\
\&, only mismatched packages with lower version or build numbers are
removed from the archive. By default, all mismatched packages are removed.
.P
.SH CONFIGURATION
The default configuration directory is
.I
/etc/sbotest
with files
.I
sbotest.conf\fR\
\&,
.I
sbotest.hints
and
.I
obsolete
being recognized.
.I
obsolete
is relevant only if testing against Slackware -current. To use
an alternative configuration directory, set an environment
variable
.I
SBOTEST_CONF_DIR\fR\
\&.
.P
Configuration options and hints can be set from the command line with
.B
config
and
.B
hints\fR\
\&, respectively.
.P
Several default settings differ from base
.B
sbotools\fR\
\&:
.P
.B
ETC_PROFILE
.RS
With a default of
.B
TRUE\fR\
\&, source all executable scripts of the form
.I
*.sh
in
.I
/etc/profile
before building each script.
.RE
.P
.B
CPAN_IGNORE
.RS
With a default of
.B
TRUE\fR\
\&, build and install SlackBuilds regardless of
whether they have been installed from the CPAN.
.RE
.P
.B
SBO_HOME
.RS
The default value is
.I
/usr/sbotest\fR\
\&.
.RE
.P
.B
PKG_DIR
.RS
The default value is
.I
SBO_HOME/tests\fR\
\&. Unless an
.B
absolute path
is specified, packages built during the test run are saved
to a timestamp-designated directory under that path, e.g.
.I
/usr/sbotest/tests/2025-08-28-20:59-tests\fR\
\&.
.RE
.P
.B
LOG_DIR
.RS
The default value is
.I
SBO_HOME/logs\fR\
\&. Unless an
.B
absolute path
is specified, log files are saved to a timestamp-designated
directory under that path.
.RE
.P
.B
SBO_ARCHIVE
.RS
This setting is used only when running
.B
sbotest\fR\
\&, and has a default value of
.I
SBO_HOME/archive\fR\
\&. Any packages stored here are installed prior to calling
.B
sboinstall(1)\fR\
\&, provided that they:
.RS
.IP \[bu] 3n
Are not test targets.
.IP \[bu] 3n
Are required by the script to be tested.
.IP \[bu] 3n
Are not already installed.
.IP \[bu] 3n
Have versions and build numbers matching the local repository.
.RE
.P
The archive can be kept in sync with the local repository by running
.B
sbotest
with
.B
--archive-rebuild\fR\
\&.
.RE
.P
Hints may be specified in
.I
/etc/sbotest/sbotest.hints\fR\
\&. Saved build options from
.B
sbotools
are ignored. See
.B
sbotools.conf(5)
and
.B
sbotools.hints(5)
for more information.
.SH EXIT CODES
.P
.B
sbotest
can exit with the following codes:
.RS

0:  all operations were succesful.
.RE
.RS
1:  a usage error occured, such as specifying invalid options.
.RE
.RS
2:  a script or module error occurred.
.RE
.RS
6:  unable to obtain a required file handle.
.RE
.RS
7:  unable to get required info from the
.I
info
file.
.RE
.RS
8:  unable to unset the exec-on-close bit on a temporary file.
.RE
.RS
12: interrupt signal received.
.RE
.RS
13: circular dependencies detected.
.RE
.RS
15: GPG verification failed.
.RE
.SH BUGS
.P
None known. If found, Issues and Pull Requests to
.UR https://github.com/pghvlaans/sbotest/
.UE
are always welcome.
.SH SEE ALSO
.P
sboconfig(1), sbofind(1), sbohints(1), sboinstall(1), sbotools.conf(5), sbotools.hints(5), SBO::Lib(3), SBO::Lib::Build(3), SBO::Lib::Info(3), SBO::Lib::Pkgs(3), SBO::Lib::Repo(3), SBO::Lib::Solibs(3), SBO::Lib::Tree(3), SBO::Lib::Util(3), sbolint(1), sbopkglint(1)
.SH ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
.B
Jacob Pipkin\fR\
\&,
.B
Luke Williams
and
.B
Andreas Guldstrand
are the original authors of
.B
sbotools\fR\
\&.
.P
.B
sbo-maintainer-tools
is written and maintained by
.B
B. Watson\fR\
\&.
.SH AUTHOR
.P
K. Eugene Carlson <kvngncrlsn@gmail.com>
